---
layout: post
type: post
title: "Work update for week 13"
description: Work update for week 13 2014
headline: "Work update for week 13 2014"
category: work
tags: [AAROC, CHAIN-REDS, SANREN, site deployment, EGI.eu]
image: 
  feature: seaside.jpg
comments: true 
mathjax: false
---

# TL;DR

As is customary, the summary goes first, so you can know whether or not it's worth your while to continue reading. I've been busy with the following activities, in order of time dedicated to them (full details below):

 1. EGI MoU Update
 1. Bringing Africa Arabia Regional Operations Centre to production: 
  1. Fixing issues at ZA-UFS site, incl. SAGrid VOMS update
  1. Releasing production version of ZA-MERAKA services (Dev2Prod release)
  1. Fixing the NGI-Nagios instance to monitor AAROC sites
  1. Supporting sites for production readiness.
 1. Followup with APHRC and ILRI regarding CHAIN-REDS activities. 

Some details for those interested below

# EGI MoU Update

The Resource Infrastructure Provider MoU that allows the Africa-Arabia Region to inter-operate with EGI.eu and other peer infrastructures had to be significantly modified. EGI.eu has a new director (Yannick Legre), who is taking a very different, smoother approach to international collaboration. This change has been reflected into the MoU. This work was done in the context of CHAIN-REDS WP3.

# AAROC is operational

Yesterday (26/03/2014), we closed the last ticket in the process of the creation of the Africa-Arabia Regional Operations Centre. The procedure foresees certain actions taken by both the new OC (us) and COD (EGI.eu). Most of the time was taken up in upgrading middleware on ZA-MERAKA core services (WMS, top-bdii, etc). Most of the time was taken in ensuring that the new NGI-NAGIOS instance was properly configured. In summary, the following has been done: 
 
 1. a new Region has been created in the GOCDB, triggering similar additions in GGUS, Operations Centre and Accounting portal.
 1. branches for the region have been created in the ops and dteam VOs
 1. Sites have been moved from NGI_ZA or added afresh.

## Behold - it is pretty awesome.

This sounds almost trivial, but it's a **major** step forward for the region. For the first time we have a coherent, regional view of what's going on in terms of computational infrastructure. We're in the process of adding a lot of brand new sites in Egypt and Kenya, while long-time collaborations with Marocco, Algeria, Nigeria, Tanzania are coming back to life. Getting a new site onto the grid is now a matter of following **routine** instead of applying some black magic; I'm happy, very happy about this, it's a place we always should have been. Hey, better late than never.

## Wait, it gets better 

It's one thing finding new resources and having procedures for getting them up and running, but who actually does the work ? The answer is : [ansible](http://www.ansible.com). We've got playbooks to execute the deployment of a new site **from**. **scratch**. Doesn't matter what the initial state of the machines we get is, Ansible is idempotent. You tell it what you need, it will figure out how to get there. So, the only manual steps are :
 
 1. gather site description
 1. add new inventory to the repo 
 1. add site variables to the repo
 1. bootstrap machines to prepare for secure remote-control
 1. Execute deployment. 

It's almost too easy.

I've been testing this stuff in the dev branch of the repo on C4's OpenNebula cluster, and last night tested the procedure for ZA-UFS who had a broken site-bdii. 30 minutes of hacking, less than 2 minutes of deploy. Site admins get a ticket closed, ROC gets a perfectly functional site, everyone's happy. 

# ILRI, Nairobi iHub and APHRC followup

In week 11 I was at a workshop in Nairobi representing the ROC and the CHAIN-REDS project. The workshop focussed on discoverability of African scholarship, a large part of which consists of data repositories. Some participants were from the International Livestock Research Institute (part of CGIAR) and the African Population Health Research Centre. Both of these conduct research and own significant data repositories. Part of the work conducted for CHAIN-REDS was the promotion of the OAI-PMH standard, and inclusion of these repositories in the CHAIN-REDS knowledge base, to increase their visibility. APHRC in particular stands to benefit soon from the CHAIN-REDS Open Data pilot which will see a persistent identifier mint made available to repositories which are not part of DataCite and similar federations. 

At iHub in Nairobi on the other hand, I discovered one fine GPGPU-enabled HPC cluster and a social sciences research team who are using machine learning, social networks and HPC to mitigate social unrest. Fantastic stuff going on at the iHub. Followup with them is happening on two fronts:
 
 1. Get that cluster on the grid ! 
 1. work on a machine learning "challenge" to demonstrate usefulness to the research team of using the grid.
 
